# Examples

## Contact stability conditions

<img align="right" src="../doc/src/images/static_equilibrium_polygon.png" width="300" />

Contact-stability areas and volumes are conditions used to prevent contacts
from slipping or detaching during motion. The examples in the
[contact\_stability](contact_stability/) folder illustrate these conditions:
static-equilibrium COM polygon, multi-contact ZMP support areas, etc.

In these examples, you can move contacts by selecting them in the OpenRAVE GUI.
Contact wrenches are computed at each contact to support the robot in
static-equilibrium. Try moving the blue box (in the plane above the robot)
around, and see what happens when it exits the polygon.

## Horizontal walking

<img align="right" src="../doc/src/images/horizontal_walking.png" width="300" />

In this example, we make the JVRC-1 model walk forward on a flat horizontal
floor. The COM trajectory is generated on the fly by [linear model predictive
control](https://scaron.info/doc/pymanoid/walking-pattern-generation.html#pymanoid.mpc.LinearPredictiveControl).

This examples illustrates the tutorial [Prototyping a walking pattern
generator](https://scaron.info/robot-locomotion/prototyping-a-walking-pattern-generator.html).
The concepts it introduces are the same as those implemented in a [full-fledged
walking controller](https://github.com/stephane-caron/lipm_walking_controller/)
applied for walking and stair climbing with the HRP-4 humanoid.

## Inverse kinematics

<img align="right" src="../doc/src/images/inverse_kinematics.png" width="300" />

The [inverse\_kinematics.py](inverse_kinematics.py) script shows how to use
[inverse kinematics (IK)](https://scaron.info/robot-locomotion/inverse-kinematics.html)
to achieve a set of whole-body tasks. It contains two equivalent
implementations of the IK solver setup. The former is best for beginners as it
uses the simpler ``Stance`` interface. The latter is for more advanced users
and shows how to add individual tasks one by one.

The example loads the
[JVRC-1](https://github.com/stephane-caron/openrave_models/tree/master/JVRC-1)
humanoid model, then generates a posture where the robot has both feet on
pre-defined contact locations. The robot tracks a reference COM position given
by the red box, which you can move around directly by using the interaction
mode of the OpenRAVE GUI.

## Linear inverted pendulum stabilization

<img align="right" src="../doc/src/images/pendulum_push.png" width="300" />

This example implements a basic stabilizer for the inverted pendulum model
based on proportional feedback of the divergent component of motion.

Balancing is the action of constantly compensating undesired motions of the
center of mass by regulating interaction forces with the environment. The core
question is: what forces should be applied in response to an undesired center
of mass motion? This example illustrates the solution based on [feedback of the
3D DCM](https://doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2015.2405592) which is both efficient and
simple to implement.

## Multi-contact walking

<img align="right" src="../doc/src/images/multi_contact_walking.png" width="300" />

In this example, we make the JVRC-1 model walk accross a circular staircase
where all contacts are tilted.

The environment is generated so as to make the locomotion task difficult. We
solve it using a [multi-contact linear
MPC](https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01349880/document) where the
formulation is kept linear thanks to the pendular COM acceleration cone.

## VHIP stabilization

<img align="right" src="../doc/src/images/pendulum_push.png" width="300" />

This script comes with the research paper [Biped Stabilization by Linear
Feedback of the Variable-Height Inverted Pendulum
Model](https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02289919v1/document). It compares
two stabilizers for the inverted pendulum model. The first one (baseline) is
based on proportional feedback of the [3D
DCM](https://doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2015.2405592). The second one (proposed)
performs proportional feedback of a 4D DCM of the same model; see the paper for
details.
